Document standardized provenance recording (#442)
hermes-hmc/workflow: docs/adr/0014-standardized-provenance-recording.md

<!--
SPDX-FileCopyrightText: 2025 German Aerospace Center (DLR), Forschungszentrum Jülich, Helmholtz-Zentrum Dresden-Rossendorf

SPDX-License-Identifier: CC-BY-SA-4.0
-->
# Standardized provenance recording

* Status: proposed
* Deciders: sdruskat, skernchen, notactuallyfinn
* Date: 2025-10-17

Technical story: 
* https://github.com/softwarepub/hermes/pull/442
* https://github.com/softwarepub/hermes/issues/363

## Context and Problem Statement

To consolidate traceability of the metadata, and resolution based on metadata sources in case of duplicates, etc., we need to record the provenance of metadata values in a __standardized__ way.

> Additionally we use the [PROV-O ontology](https://www.w3.org/TR/prov-o/) and [JSON-LD](https://www.w3.org/TR/json-ld/) and want that HERMES records as much of the provenance as possible to not overcomplicate plugin development.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To achieve this, we use the [PROV-O ontology](https://www.w3.org/TR/prov-o/) serialized as [JSON-LD](https://www.w3.org/TR/json-ld/). Additionally, HERMES should make it possible to record as much of the provenance as possible *centrally*, i.e., as part of the core codebase. This is to keep plugin developers from having to supply their own provenance solutions.
```

To do this, we need to specify what provenance information is recorded and how it can be implemented in HERMES to make it easy to use.

## Considered Options

* Provide HERMES API-methods that also document themselves

## Decision Outcome

> Chosen option: "Provide HERMES API-methods that also document themselves", because comes out best.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

As this is in the proposal stage, I think we need more feedback on the actual solution. What are alternatives for this solution? This ADR is already a very good track record of our thinking so far, but I think we need more buy-in before making the actual decision.

That said, this isn't a blocker for the PR, it just says: we need a decision about this further down the line.

## Pros and Cons of the Options

### Provide HERMES API-methods that also document themselves

Provide API-methods for loading, writing, making web requests, etc. that document themselves.<br>
Those methods take also the function that should be used for the task at hand and just define a framework in which we implement the provenance-data recording.<br>
Like so:
```python
class HermesPlugin():
    def load(func, path: str, *args, **kwargs):
        # TODO: handle and record byte formats properly
        with open(path) as fi:
            data = func(fi, *args, **kwargs)
        prov.record("load", path, func.__name__, data) # also module of func
        return data

    def write(func, path: str, data, *args, **kwargs):
        # TODO: handle and record byte formats properly
        with open(path) as fi:
            func(fi, data, *args, **kwargs)
        prov.record("write", path, func.__name__, data) # also module of func
```

* Good, because allows for recording of provenance information of the plugins
* Good, because it isn't making plugin development harder

> * Bad, because API methods may not cover all I/O functionality python provides

Reviewer: True, but we can make a best effort to cover as many as make sense.
When we provide the respective API (`load_file`, `make_request`, etc.)
and make it usable enough so that developers don't see themselves forced to come up with their own solutions,
I think we can get good coverage.

Probably mostly a question of documentation, plugin templates, etc.
